In this lecture, you'll learn about the first of the access layer switch security mechanisms, which is DHCP
snooping. And you remember from the DHCP section that we covered before, that on our Cisco router, if
our clients are not on the same subnet as with DHCP server, we'll need to configure the IP helper address.
So that's what we've done in the example here in the diagram.
PC1 and PC2
are in the 10.10.10.0/24 subnet and their DHCP server is on the other side of the router at
10.10.20.10/24.
I've configured a scope on my DHCP server for the 10.10.10.0/24 subnet giving IP addresses starting
at 10.10.10.10/24, going up to 10.10.10.254/24 for a subnet mask of /24, default gateway 10.10.10.1/24.
And a DNS server is also on the DHCP server, which is 10.10.20.1/24.
When the PCs send out a DHCP request, that goes as broadcast traffic so it will not be forwarded by the router
by default.
So on the router, I need to configure the IP helper address command on the interface, whose requests
come in on and that forwards the requests to the DHCP server.
So we covered all that configuration before, but we can have a problem in our network, which is a
rogue DHCP server. So you see
in our example here, that a DHCP server has been connected on the same side of the router as the PCs. Actually, it
doesn't matter where it was connected. It would still give us the same problem. And this server has
been configured to give out DHCP addresses.
It's also giving addresses in the range 10.10.10.0 with a subnet mask of /24.
But the default gateway is configured 10.10.10.254 and the DNS server is
10.10.10.254 as well.
So when the PCs send out a DHCP request, it will get the offer from this DHCP server here, which
has an invalid default gateway and DNS server address.
So the PCs won't actually have any connectivity to the network.
And in the example here, it's going to be quite hard to detect that because we're actually getting
an IP address in the correct subnet.
It's not going to be immediately obvious what the problem was.
So if you do get a rogue DHCP server, that can be, what it can do is drop your PCs off of the network.
Now, more often than not, this is not actually going to be a malicious attacker who's doing this deliberately.
More likely at some end user who takes something maybe from home like a home router and plugs it in the network
and it's got a DHCP service running on there.
Or it could also be maybe one of your IT staff.
And they are running a lab, which has got a DHCP server in it, and accidentally they connect it to the real network.
So more likely it will be an accident,
but the impact is the same.
It's going to be devastating for those clients.
It's going to drop them off of the network.
So there is mitigation that we can take that will prevent rogue DHCP servers from being able to be active
on your network.
And this solution is DHCP snooping. With DHCP snooping,
you enable this on your access
layer switches and you configure the ports that you're DHCP server is connected to as a trusted port.
So you see in the example here, if we can figure this out on Switch2, it would be interface fa0/2
that is directly connected to the DHCP server that would be configured as a trusted port.
From Switch1's point of view down at the bottom, the DHCP Offers are going to come in on interface
fa0/1,
so that also needs to be configured as a trusted port. So trusted ports are ports directly connected to the
DHCP server and also on your inter-switch links leading down to the PCs.
When any DHCP server traffic comes in on a trusted port, the switch will allow that traffic to go
through.
But if DHCP server traffic comes in a port that is not trusted, then the switch will drop it.
So here, we're trusting all the way through to our valid DHCP server.
If somebody plugs in a rogue DHCP server on any other port, then the DHCP offers that it gives are going
to be dropped by the switch. They are not going to get to the client.
So they're not going to get that invalid information.
The
configuration for this, we've done this on Switch1 globally, you say ip dhcp snooping.
You also need to enable it at your access VLAN level as well.
So we also say ip dhcp snooping vlan 10 for example, and then configure your trusted ports. So that's interface fa0/1
on Switch1. ip dhcp snooping trust
OK, so that is why we have DHCP snooping,
what it is, and also a quick look at the configuration as well.